We would like to welcome all of you to this update on the situation facing our brothers
in Russia.
As you know, on April 20th, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation ruled against
Jehovah's Witnesses and decided to liquidate the administrative center of Jehovah's Witnesses
in Russia and all of our local religious organizations.
We appealed this decision and the hearing for the appeal took place in Moscow on July 17th.
Sadly, the three-judge panel upheld this unjust decision against us, which effectively
bans our religious activity in Russia.
In a few moments, we will be speaking with Brother Mark Sanderson of the governing body
who was with our brothers during the appeal hearing in Moscow.
But before we talk to Brother Sanderson, let's first visit with a delegation that accompanied
him in attending the Supreme Court hearing.
The delegations resolved to help our brothers in Russia reassures us of the unity of our
organization and the need for all of us to face challenges with courage.
We are on route to Heathrow Airport to flying to Frankfurt to meet up with some brothers
who are heading off to Moscow together to go to the Supreme Court hearing on July 17th.
Our delegation is made up of 20 brothers from 18 different lands.
I truly love the brothers in Russia.
I've had association with them for many years.
I was in a Russian congregation and so my heart is right with the brothers and sisters
in Russia.
I worked in the Russian language field for 13 years before I came to Bethel.
So I feel like the Russian brothers and sisters are really my family.
Everywhere I go, the brothers are always asking, how are the friends in Russia?
And they want me to reassure them that they have been praying for them.
And that's not just mature brothers in the congregation, young children ask the question
as well.
They've been taught to pray for the brothers in Russia.
I could have filled up my language with many drawings from the children in Belgium for
the brothers, their little brothers in Russia.
And we also have heard some cases of inactive brothers and sisters who have been deeply
moved by the determination of our brothers in Russia.
And the brothers in Sweden were so impressed by the fine attitude, especially when the
police is raiding the kingdom halls.
Sometimes they are threatened, but they are sitting in quiet and calm and they are not insulting
in return.
Do I fear going to Russia where our work is under ban?
Not at all.
There is no reason to be afraid.
I am ready to join my brothers and stand by their side in this historic moment.
I'm not afraid to go to Russia, not because I feel I'm so strong.
But because I feel that Jehovah is going to be with us and he is the one who is going
to be supporting us.
Our intent is to try to meet with as many of the high officials from the various embassies
in Moscow as possible.
And we have done those meetings in the spirit of first Peter 3, 15, where it says that
we should defend our fate and our hope, but do it with the mild timber and the prospect.
And that's what we have done.
We don't demand anything from the officials, but we tell them what's the situation with
our brothers.
17th of January 2017, the National Federation of the Russian Federation of the Berlin
The decision was made by the Russian Federation of the 20th to the end of 2017,
remains without change.
The official wish was to organize the current center of the Republic of Russia without
any change.
During the hearing of the people who were here in this hall,
Jehovah could clearly see that the people of the Republic were not extremists.
The purpose of the Russian Federation is to start a religious movement,
which is a very sad situation for our country, and in general for freedom.
The court case against our brothers in Russia in some aspects resembles the court case against
Jesus Christ.
It looked 2267 when asked if he was the Christ, Jesus said to the Sanhedron,
"'Even if I told you, you would not believe it at all.
Similarly, our brothers have been able to show striking evidence to prove that the charges
against us are completely unfounded.
But despite such evidence, which is clear even to non-witnesses, it is as if we have said
nothing.
Such treatment of God's people, though, is to be expected in these last days.
But now, we have Brother Mark Sanderson of the governing body tied in with us.
And first, we'd like to say, Mark, thank you very much for joining us for this interview.
And especially, thank you very much for being with the brothers there in Russia.
Well, thank you so much, Steve.
It really was a joy and really an honor to be with our brothers in the courtroom in Russia.
But now, let me ask you this, what impact will this decision have on our brothers and
sisters in Russia?
Well, perhaps it's too early to know exactly what will take place.
But certainly, when we met with various officials at the embassies in Moscow, their feeling
is that this is going to give open license for individuals who are prejudiced to really
just take out their feelings on all of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Already, we've seen incidences of witnesses having their homes burned.
We've had kingdom halls be vandalized.
We've had children harassed at school by their teachers.
We've had brothers threatened with loss of employment.
So we can expect that we will see greater persecution in that land.
Well, we're sorry to hear that, but we know that's reality.
But let me ask you, are there options for appeal available at this point?
Well, within the country of Russia, we've exhausted all of the available appeals.
But of course, we are going to take this matter to the European Court of Human Rights.
In fact, within the next day or two, we will be applying for what is called interim measures
where the European Court, if they choose, can step in and even attempt to block the carrying
out of a major decision.
Of course, really, it's very uncertain as to whether Russia will actually respect the
actions of the European Court.
We'll have to wait and see.
Mark, do you see any scriptural parallels to the events you witnessed in the Supreme Court?
You know, Steve, I couldn't help but continually think of what Jesus had said in the Matthew
chapter 5 and verse 11 when he said that they would lyingly say every sort of wicked thing
against you.
And that is just exactly what we heard again this time during the appeal hearing.
These officials were just repeating these ridiculous accusations against Jehovah's Witnesses
attempting to even equate us with terrorist groups.
Now already, the authorities of the world are speaking out about this.
The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom on Monday already issued
a statement.
And maybe I can just read you the first paragraph of this statement that was released.
They said the US Commission on International Religious Freedom denounces the Russian Supreme
Court ruling on Monday rejecting an appeal by the Jehovah's Witnesses against an
April decision declaring them as extremist.
USCIRF Chairman Daniel Mark commented that quote, the Supreme Court's decision sadly reflects
the government's continued equating of peaceful religious freedom practice to extremism.
The witnesses are not an extremist group and should be able to practice their faith openly
and freely and without government repression, end of quote.
So these government officials of the world, they recognize the truth.
They understand that these charges that have been laid against us are truly ridiculous
and absurd.
What a powerful statement you read there.
Now we learned in the segment, we just watched that the brothers in the delegation had
an opportunity to speak to embassy representatives in Moscow.
Let me ask you, Mark, what were the results of those meetings?
Well, just to begin, Steve, I'd like to just comment about the courage of these men who
accepted this assignment to go to Moscow.
You know, when they were invited to come on this assignment, not one of these men, even
for a moment, even asked a question like, is this safe?
Will my, will I be in danger in going on this assignment?
Immediately they said yes and began making their plans.
And then once in Moscow, we divided into five different groups so that we could visit
the embassies of the countries that we belong to.
And so myself, I was assigned to go with a group that met with four different embassies.
We visited the United States, the United Kingdom, the European Union, and Canada.
And at each of these four embassies, we were given a beautiful reception.
In one case, we met with an ambassador, in two cases, we met with deputy ambassadors
and in the final one, we met with one of the secretaries.
But I have to say, as these people listened to what we had to say, of course, they're already
very informed about our issue.
But the question that kept coming over and over again was, why Jehovah's Witnesses?
Why isn't Jehovah's Witnesses are receiving this kind of attention from the government?
Well, we were able to give a very, very fine witness and include many scriptural thoughts.
And particularly to one ambassador who's a real gentleman and really listened to us patiently,
we were able to say that we, Jehovah's Witnesses have come through the concentration camps
in the Nazi times.
We've survived being exiled to Siberia.
We survived the work camps in the Gulag.
And all of this because of the protection of our God Jehovah.
That's why we're still here.
And we continue to look to our God, Jehovah, for His protection.
And so the reason that we had come to see these officials was because we are reasonable people.
And we wanted to talk to other reasonable people to see what might be done to help our brothers
and sisters.
And these officials were so extremely receptive to this type of approach and what an honor
it was to be able to praise the name of Jehovah before them.
Very encouraging mark.
How did the brothers though react when they heard the negative decision?
Well, Steve, there's always been a joyful presence in the courtroom on these different
occasions when I've been president in Russia.
But this time with the reading of this decision, there is certainly a soberness among our brothers.
And they recognize the seriousness of this matter.
But I have to say, I think the Apostle Paul really sums up the way our brothers feel in
Russia.
In 2 Corinthians chapter 4 and verse 8, where he said, we are hard pressed in every way,
but not cramped beyond movement.
We are perplexed, but not absolutely with no way out.
We are persecuted, but not abandoned.
We are knocked down, but not destroyed.
And I think just even in a small way, where it says that we are persecuted, but not abandoned,
I think that just having this international delegation in the courtroom to see that brothers
were willing to come, risking their own safety to support the brothers, to be there with
them in the courtroom at this difficult time, just was a reassurance that Jehovah himself
was with them.
And that these representatives, in some small way, represented to them, Jehovah's love,
Jehovah's care, and that certainly we were not going to abandon our dear brothers in
Russia no matter what situation may come.
I like that thought too, Mark, that we're not down, but we're not destroyed.
We could say we're not down, but not knocked out.
With Jehovah's help, we get back up again.
But now, how have our brothers and sisters in Russia been faring since the first Supreme
Court ruling in April?
Well, you know, Steve, as I mentioned earlier, there have been many incidents across the
country of vandalism, of attacks.
Of course, we've been reporting on JW.org about our dear brother, Dennis Christensen, who
was arrested and has been held now for two months basically in the prison there in Russia.
He has not been allowed to communicate with his wife during this time.
And now we learned when we were present in Russia that the officials only allow him to
shower twice a week.
Can you imagine treating him as though he was a very, very serious criminal when all he
did was attend a meeting to read God's word and worship Jehovah.
What a horrible thing.
And of course, the officials from all the countries of the world recognized the terrible, terrible
injustice that's being done here.
But having said that, in spite of these attacks that we have seen across the country, what
we also see is that our brothers and sisters are continuing in their worship for Jehovah.
They're continuing to have their meetings.
One of the brothers commented to me, he said, some who used to never comment at the meetings,
now they love to comment and comment and express themselves.
Some who have been inactive have begun to attend the meetings again.
And one brother told me that when they held a small mini convention, you know, watching
some of the replays that have been made available, that just in their small group, they had five
baptized.
Can you imagine?
So we can say with confidence that all of these efforts that are being made to try to
stop our worship of Jehovah, to wipe it out, are not going to have any success.
It really reminds me, would it be okay if I just shared this scriptural thought?
Absolutely, please.
It just makes me think of this thought in Psalm 124.
And this really has to be the confidence of our brothers in Russia, but it needs to be
the confidence really of God's people all around the world.
We have to put our faith in these words.
It says, if Jehovah had not been with us, this verse two, if Jehovah had not been with us,
when men rose up to attack us, then they would have swallowed us up alive.
And their anger was burning against us.
Then the waters would have washed us away.
The torrent would have swept over us.
The raging waters would have overwhelmed us.
May Jehovah be praised, for he has not given us as prey to their teeth.
We are like a bird that escaped from the hunter's trap.
The trap was broken and we escaped.
Our help is in the name of Jehovah, the maker of heaven and earth.
Well, so many times our enemies have thought that they had us locked in that trap and that
there was no way to escape, but how Jehovah has proven them wrong and how he has come
to the aid of his people.
And that is the same confidence that we have today.
And it's the same confidence our brothers will have.
It's the same confidence we'll have no matter where we are in the world as the scene
of this world continues to change.
We wholeheartedly agree with you and it definitely warms our heart to hear the strengthening
comments.
Thank you very much, Mark, and thank you again too.
And the rest of the delegation for traveling to Russia to be with our dear brothers and
sisters.
And we're confident that your presence assured them of Jehovah's love and Jehovah's
care for them.
Thank you so much, Steve.
As I said, it was a great, great honor and privilege.
I truly love our dear brothers in Russia.
Although the appeal decision was not in our favor, we are not disheartened.
This is our regional convention theme for this year emphasizes, we do not give up.
Brothers and sisters in Russia, we encourage you to stay close to Jehovah and his organization.
Continue to pray to Jehovah for strength to face this persecution with boldness.
Knowing he will provide you with a strength needed, along with a guidance and wisdom that
you need.
And please know that you are excellent examples for the rest of us to follow when we face
persecution.
We wholeheartedly agree with the Bible writer's expressions in a back at 3 verse 18.
He said,
Yet as for me, I will exalt in Jehovah.
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.
Yes, whatever the world does to us, we maintain our faith in Jehovah's
saving power and will do our utmost to remain in Jehovah's protective care.
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.